Skip to content
About Us
Our Vision
Community Land Acquisition Initiative envisions a harmonious coexistence between humanity and nature, guided by First Nation’s sciences, the wisdom of deep ecology and the reverence for the land inherent in First Nation’s beliefs. Our vision has its basis in the understanding that we are interconnected threads in the intricate web of life, and our well-being is intricately linked to the health of the land, waters, and all living beings.
CLAI was initiated in consultation with Traditional Owners of the Bundjalung Nation. We are working with all First Nation Stakeholders to preserve the indigenous cultural heritage and ecological values of all lands within the Bundjalung Nations area.
Our vision is to broker positive, solution focused outcomes for community, government and developers to transfer stewardship of biodiverse-rich areas which are currently under private ownership to the community in perpetuity for all.
Our Mission
Community Land Acquisition Initiative - Wallum
The Wallum site is one of the last remaining habitats of its kind, and home to 9 Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC) threatened species. Species such as the Wallum Sedge Frog, Glossy Black Cockatoo, and Koala inhabit this rare coastal heathland. These species have significant totemic associations for First Nations communities. The site is adjacent to Simpsons Creek, connecting to the Brunswick River, and holds numerous significant cultural and environmental values.
The vision for Wallum Brunswick Heads is a multi-faceted approach to preserving rare ecosystems , integrating education , cultural heritage , and sustainable economic activity . By focusing on conservation , community engagement , and financial sustainability , this initiative seeks to protect the land from urban development, provide a platform for learning, and create a space where both the environment and community can thrive together. With the addition of profit-for-purpose models like the cultural centre, kiosk, and infrastructure to support public access, the project is designed to be both a conservation success and a sustainable, community-driven initiative .
Conservation Land Trust
The land will be held in a Conservation Land Trust , where it will be protected in perpetuity as a community asset, and neither sold on, nor developed.
A Management Plan will be implemented where decisions about stewardship and future care will be made in consultation with relevant First Nations cultural, and ecological advisory groups.
Irrespective of ownership, whether held by community or in collaboration with government the land will not be sold. This legal provision will ensure the continuity of the conservation initiative for future generations, whereby the public will have access to the land, to walk and enjoy.
Introduction to the purchase of Wallum Brunswick Heads (5.8MB PDF)
Download the CLAI Brochure here
Make a Pledge
Will you help us realise our bold vision? Together as Earth's custodians we will stand up for Wallum's precious wildlife and preserve it for all of us.
Your contributions, whether money, or in the form of biodiversity and carbon credits, serve as the cornerstone of our mission.
You can make a pledge here
Team Members
Wendy Royston
Wendy originally taught English in high school and then saw the need for a Rudolf Steiner school in Murwillumbah, Northern Rivers, New South Wales. She established the school with others and worked as the administrator for five years. Wendy has been an activist all her life starting with the Vietnam war moratoriums, continuing through to the first environmental protest in Australia at Terania forest. More recently she has been involved in the Adani protest and visited the camp in Queensland. Last year she was involved in the blockade of the coal port at Newcastle. She also co-manages a women's empowerment program in India, since 2007. Her experience with the environment and bush regeneration and involvement in the above activities have developed her skills so that she is well suited to be a member of the CLAI team.
Sandra Lundbergs
Sandra is a psychologist, meditation teacher and artist, and has previously run her own training company. She is a long-term resident of Byron Shire, and nature lover. She is a firm believer that biodiversity and high cultural heritage and ecological value sites need to be returned to the community and preserved for future generations. She is a member of the Australian Plants Society, and is a regular bushwalker.
Graeme Batterbury
Following a career as a photographer, Graeme travelled to India in 1999 and was so moved by the poverty and inequity he experienced there, he was motivated to start a charity to address the imbalances inherent in the patriarchal Indian society. Graeme is the Founder and Administrator of Women's Empowerment in Indian Villages, a project of Academy of Root Development (Australia) Incorporated, which has been bringing awareness and opportunity to rural families in Bihar, India since 2005. He is an experienced Company Secretary, Public Officer and dedicated environmental and social activist.
Advisors
Auntie Leonee Roberts-Nowta
Auntie Leonee is a Widjabal-Minjungbal elder/knowledge-holder who spent her childhood in Brunswick Heads staying with her maternal grandmother at Billinudgel. Her cousin lived on The Saddle Road and on weekends and holidays the family would camp at Wallum, alongside Simpsons Creek.
Auntie Leonee has extensive knowledge of the kinship and connection to Country of the local First Nation's people and has a passion for following "proper lore/law" and protecting the environment. Her philosophy can be summed up by two phrases she believes in: "Stand back and let Peace come in" and "Person stand behind, Vision stay up front".
Mark Cora
Minjungbal Cultural Leader, Educator, and Independent Artist. Mark has spent his career working within the Community Service sector and the Arts sector. Leading the development of Aboriginal Organisations, promoting Aboriginal service delivery and culturally informed practice. He is passionate about the protection of Country and creating opportunities for cultural practice and advancement of First Nation youth, through connection to country and arts and culture. A founding member of the Kinship Festival, the largest arts, culture and dance festival in the Northern Rivers. Mark is advising CLAI in cultural protocol and community engagement.
Duncan Dey
Duncan Dey is a Civil Engineer specialised in flood and stormwater analysis, and with broad knowledge of the rest of the watercycle and of coastal processes. He brings those skills to the role as Advisor to CLAI, as well as his experience with community groups in Australia and overseas. His priorities are environmental protection, and respect and support for community.
Dave Rawlins
Dave Rawlins completed an honours degree in zoology and for over 20 years has worked in the Northern Rivers region undertaking ecological restoration. He runs his own business with a focus on conserving threatened species and educating people on biodiversity conservation issues. Dave, for over a decade, has been part of the long community effort to highlight the importance of the Wallum development site and to protect the significant biodiversity values of the area. Inspired by First Nations people's connection to land, Dave believes the CLAI mission for the Wallum site can create an opportunity for everyone to further connect to, and care for Country.
Luciana Bowen
Luciana Bowen is a qualified Environmental Scientist, Lawyer, Regenerator, and Mediator. A passionate community environmental advocate and long-term resident of the Byron Shire for more than 25 years, she is dedicated to protecting the region's unique natural and cultural heritage.
Luciana is particularly passionate in the conservation of the Wallum ecosystems of Brunswick Heads, recognising its exceptional biodiversity, ecological value, and cultural significance. Through community advocacy, and environmental stewardship, she works to preserve these irreplaceable habitat hotspots for future generations.
Drawing on her expertise in science, law, mediation, and environmental regeneration, Luciana is committed to fostering collaborative solutions that support both people and nature, ensuring that the rich ecological and cultural landscapes of the Byron Shire continue to thrive.
Biodiversity Legacy Limited
Biodiversity Legacy offers a pioneering approach to protecting land for future generations and engaging regional communities in its ongoing environmental stewardship.
Formed in 2022 Biodiversity Legacy's key function is to support community groups such ​as CLAI Wallum to acquire land and transfer the land title into a safe land ownership structure ​that supports in-perpetuity habitat protection.
BDL supports emerging and established biolinks nationally and has the experience, ​governance and networks in place to help us achieve our goals. This BDL framework ​effectively returns land to a community-based ownership structure, where the land can ​be cared for and enjoyed by everyone.
www.biodiversitylegacy.org.au
Seed Northern Rivers
Seed Northern Rivers (formerly Mullum S.E.E.D.) is a dynamic ecosystem of changemakers, organisations, and community groups dedicated to regenerating the environment and building resilience across the Northern Rivers. Since our beginnings 16 years ago, Seed Northern Rivers has emerged as a catalyst and backbone organisation—supporting 35+ grassroots initiatives with mentoring, resources, strategic support, and access to vital, shared infrastructure.
https://seednorthernrivers.org.au
Website images by Beverley Callow, Graeme Batterbury, Mac Maderski, Mark Seiffert, Sandra Lundbergs
All images © copyright of the photographer
Scroll to top