Skip to content
Donate
CLAI is currently taking donations to cover the administrative expenses and promotion of our Cause.
Membership and Working Account:
Funds to pay administration expenses
BSB: 722-744 Account Number: 100153390
(Not tax deductible)
CLAI is a Registered Charity with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission with tax deductible gift recipient status.
Make a tax deductible gift to CLAI Gift Fund
Account Name: Community Land Acquisition
BSB: 722-744 Account Number: 100153391
(All gifts of $2 or more are fully tax deductible in Australia)
Download CLAI Ltd 2024-25 Annual Report and Financial Statement
In the event that CLAI is unable to acquire Wallum, all Funds donated towards the purchase will be utilised to further the aims of CLAI as specified in the Constitution .
Excerpts from the Constitution:
3.1 The Company is established for the purpose of protecting and enhancing the natural environment and for the provision of information and education about the natural environment in particular by:
3.1.1 protecting and enhancing biodiversity and other threatened, at risk or endangered species; and
3.1.2 acting as a pioneer by developing a scalable model for the protection and enhancement of other important habitat anywhere in Australia.
3.2 The Company will pursue its purposes in a number of ways including by:
3.2.1 acquiring and caretaking land to further the Company's purposes;
3.2.2 developing and conducting public programs, including cultural, social and community education and research programs in connection with the Company's purposes and activities;
3.2.3 working to empower the local community, including through First Nations' sciences, education, knowledge sharing and awareness raising, to identify strategically important parcels of land and provide an appropriate ownership structure for their in-perpetuity protection, contributing to the overall cultural and biodiversity values of the region
Pledge Your Support
CLAI is taking promissory Pledges, which will be realised when the final acquisition negotiations are being conducted.
Pledges to CLAI can be made in the form of bank transfer, biodiversity or carbon credits. For foundations and organisations, options also exist for in-kind pledges or partnership status.
To make a Pledge, please fill in the form below and email to info(at)clai.au
Download the Pledge Form PDF here
After submitting your Pledge you will receive an acknowledgment and updates, and we will advise you when the funds will be needed.
PLEDGE OF SUPPORT
Acquisition of Wallum Heathland
Lot 13 DP 1251383 Brunswick Heads NSW 2483
Target: $35m in currency funds and Biodiversity Credits
We are seeking donors to help us buy the precious coastal heathland, Wallum (Lot 13 DP1251383 Brunswick Heads NSW 2483), one of the last remaining habitats of its kind, and home to 9 Federal EPBC listed Threatened Species.
Wallum is currently subject to a Historic Development Approval for a housing estate. Unless we act now, this sensitive habitat will be lost forever.
The land will be held in a Conservation Land Trust with a view to preserving the ecological values in perpetuity for the greater community.
The Management Plan, devised and informed by suitably qualified ecological and cultural advisory groups, incorporating First Nations knowledge, emphasises regeneration of the existing flora and fauna species, with a focus on protecting endangered species on the land.
The future plan is looking towards a multifaceted Environmental and Cultural Centre on the land. Financial sustainability will potentially be achieved through eco-tourism, residencies, and partnerships with universities and other environmental and cultural institutions. Public access will be managed to balance conservation with education and appreciation.
Key goals include ecological preservation and regeneration of the Wallum Heathland, cultural heritage recognition, and educational opportunities ensuring the site becomes a model for environmental stewardship.
Your contributions, whether money, or in the form of biodiversity credits, serve as the cornerstone of our mission.
Endorsements:
Bob Brown:
I wholeheartedly endorse the Community Land Acquisition Initiative Limited campaign to purchase the contentious but environmentally superb Wallum property. Having visited Wallum and seen its magnificent, ancient ecosystem and listened to the Bundjalung elders talking about their country and the need to protect it, I am happy to talk with any potential investor about saving the property through its purchase. THIS IS NATIONAL HERITAGE; it is no place for bulldozers.
Biodiversity Legacy:
Biodiversity Legacy endorses Community Land Acquisition Initiative Wallum's (CLAI) campaign to purchase the Wallum property. We connected with them in the initial stages of their establishment to share learnings, and they developed these to establish their own entity that i s place-based, community led and is guided by First Nation sciences and values . We fully believe communities can come together to save important habitats such as the Wallum site for future generations to come.
Our blueprint includes private funding and financial instruments such as biodiversity credits to generate income for land under our management and as part of packages in acquisition trade arrangements. We are lobbying government to support our initiative with funding through disaster mitigation, environmental and cultural preservation allocations and have had several productive meetings federally with the relevant departments.
Rainforest Rescue:
Rainforest Rescue endorses the Community Land Acquisition Initiative and its goal of permanently protecting the Wallum heathland and woodland at Brunswick Heads through community acquisition and conservation stewardship.
We strongly support CLAI's model: community acquisition, in-perpetuity protection through a conservation land trust, and stewardship grounded in partnership with Traditional Owners. This is what long-term conservation looks like — landscapes returned to community care, held in trust, and protected for the generations who come after us.
We commend the Save Wallum community for the care and tenacity they have brought to this campaign, and we wish CLAI every success in securing the land in perpetuity.
- Branden Barber, CEO, Rainforest Rescue
Total Environment Centre:
TEC is pleased to support the campaign for acquisition of Byron Shire’s last remaining intact Wallum ecosystems: the Wallum heathland and woodland at Simpson’s Creek, Brunswick Heads, NSW. The ecological significance of the Wallum site is widely recognised with a significant number of EPBC listed species and the importance of protecting remaining intact habitat cannot be overstated.
We are particularly impressed by the community’s efforts to acquire it for preservation and support for Community Land Acquisition Initiative objective.
- Jeff Angel, Director, Total Environment Centre
Wildlife Preservation Clarence Valley:
WPCV endorses the Community Land Acquisition Initiative (CLAI) to purchase and protect the ecologically significant Wallum ecosystem in Brunswick Heads. We have followed the development of CLAI into a community-led, conservation land-trust and commend the work done to this point. In a time of drastic biodiversity loss, CLAI presents a rare and tangible opportunity to make a positive impact on so many of our most vulnerable native species. We sincerely hope the campaign will be successful in protecting the diverse flora and fauna for future generations.
- Victor Ostrowsky, President, Wildlife Preservation Clarence Valley
Doctors for the Environment Australia:
Doctors for the Environment Australia fully supports CLAI's community-led initiative to protect one of the Byron Shire’s last remaining intact Wallum ecosystems: the Wallum heathland and woodland at Simpson’s Creek, Brunswick Heads, NSW. As doctors, we understand that human health requires a healthy planet, that our health is inextricably linked with the health of our natural world. Doctors for the Environment Australia fully supports CLAI's conservation acquisition objective and urges the protection of this vital ecosystem.
Byron Bird Buddies:
Byron Bird Buddies strongly supports the Community Land Acquisition Initiative (CLAI) and its goal to secure the Wallum heathland at Brunswick Heads for permanent protection. The Wallum is one of the few remaining intact coastal heathland ecosystems in our region, providing essential habitat for threatened and migratory bird species and supporting a rich diversity of native flora and fauna.
Seed Northern Rivers:
Seed Northern Rivers is delighted to provide formal endorsement of Community Land Acquisition Initiative (CLAI) and your vital work to secure permanent protection of the Wallum heathland and woodland at Simpson’s Creek, Brunswick Heads.
We strongly support CLAI’s community-led conservation acquisition objective. This approach embodies the principles of practical, on-ground biodiversity conservation that Seed Northern Rivers champions in our own work across the Northern Rivers region. Community-driven land stewardship has proven to be a powerful mechanism for achieving durable conservation outcomes.
Scroll to top